[MUSIC]
So how can we build an algorithm that will
be capable of discriminating the patterns
corresponding to the signal or
background before the experiment is built?
So, partially, we can rely on
simulators that can produce
those electromagnetic showers.
But we would be interested in getting
some more realistic background.
And for this, we can use experiment
that has been running for five years.
It runs in laboratory on
the beam come from CERN.
And it was actually looking for
oscillation of neutrinos.
And sensitive element
of this detector was so
precise, the cheap experiment
is also going to use
very same detector parts for
detection of the showers.
So those elements are based
on nuclear emulsion.
The emulsion consists of silver
crystals merged into a polymer.
And as a charged particle
passes through those crystals,
it activates individual crystals.
And after development, we can see black
dots at the places of activated crystals.
And you can see on the right
side of the slide,
the trajectories that are coming or
produced by different kinds of particles.
So there is one electron that passes
on high energy through the volume
of the detector, and there is another that
is framed electron with less energetic.
And you see that the size or scale of this
emulsion of this image is really small.
So it is a 550 microns
depicted on the slide.
Those emulsion layers are put
on a plastic plate on two sides.
You see them on the left.
And those interweaved with lead plates,
massive target that make particles
interact with it and produce some
kind of traces, are formed into a brick.
So this is like a building block for
OPERA experiment.
Remember, from the slides before,
that OPERA is a huge experiment,
so it is like a wall or
three story building made of bricks.
So those bricks are designed
according to these techniques.
So you can see at
the bottom of this slide,
examples of electromagnetic showers
that are produced by neutrinos.
And looking at those trajectories,
you can measure energy and
momentum of the original particles
just by counting number of tracks
that come to the shower.
The additional problem that
comes here is that we have to
dig through a lot of noise,
a lot of background tracks,
that are collected during
the period of data taking,
or that has been produced inside
emulsion plates during transportation.
In case of OPERA, the plates was
transported from Japan to Italy.
During this transportation,
it was subject for cosmic ray radiation.
So we have to clean a lot of background
to get a clear kind of signal.
So in this image, you'll see there's
some kind of clustering technique that
is being applied to the data set, and
you can see the individual showers there.
But in more realistic scenario,
the cleaning goes from
image on the top-left to
the bottom of the picture.
So there are like 10 million base tracks
that every brick consists of,
and you have to identify
maybe 1,000 of base track that
come to an electromagnetic shower.
So machine learning challenges that
are related to this problem come
into the venue of tracking.
So you have to identify
properties of the shower.
So we have to identify original
vertex the shower is coming from and
you have to identify trajectories of
additional particles in the final state,
and identify types of those particles.
Particle identification.
And in case of OPERA,
the datasets consist of background that
are collected in the real environment,
in the bricks,
the same configuration bricks that
are going to be used for SHiP experiment.
And the signal that is simulated,
it is coming in a cone-like shape, and
every shower of a signal consists of
roughly thousand different tracks.
And in OPERA, you also have information
about origin of the shower.
So you know coordinates and
angles of the initial particle
that produced that shower.
So in this example dataset,
each base track is described
by the following features,
coordinates, angles, and goodness of fit,
which could be minimum
mean squared error for
fitting individual argentum crystals
to the line of a base track.
And as I mentioned before,
the background consists of base
track randomly scattered around the brick,
and
there are in real scenario ten
to the seven background tracks.
In the setting that you will
be working with as homework,
there will be less background.
And the signal consists of background
base tracks forming a cone-like shape.
There are several volumes of signal.
And there will be 1,000 base
track pair signal volume.
Origin of a shower is known,
as I mentioned before,
the coordinates and angles are available.
So before going to solution that
you can apply to this problem,
let's consider figure of merit
that physicists are interested in.
In this case,
we are interested in estimated
energy of an electron, right?
So in case we are looking for
tracks that belong to a signal shower,
we can build a regression model
that would connect number of tracks
that algorithm has produced with
energy of original particle.
And then, we can estimate the mean square
error, and by mean square error,
estimate coefficients A and B,
and fit straight line
that will give us mean
energy given number of tracks
returned by our algorithm.
And if we compute the relative error for
every blue point or
the red line, we can plot
a histogram like one on the right.
And it looks like a Gaussian by design,
because we decided to go
to linear regression.
And the width of this shape actually
gives us the uncertainty of our error.
And this is actually energy resolution
that physicists are interested in.
Actually, they're interested in
making it as sharp as possible.
So it will mean that
algorithm is capable of very
accurate reconstruction of the energy.
But the thing is we can design
a proxy metric that can be applied
to design of a regular algorithm.
So in terms of machine learning,
we can substitute the energy resolution with
little simpler metric that
we call metric proxy,
which is average precision
along certain recall range.
So in general, it could just be
area under the precision recall curve.
Or if we're interested
in a specific region,
we can give higher weights for this region.
So as another proxy,
we can also use area under ROC curve metric.
And the baseline solution that
is produced by people at OPERA
experiment is the following, so
we consider only tracks within
a cone of 50 milliradians
from the original particle.
And we iterate for
all based tracks on the cone.
And for every base track, we compute
the distance from the origin, and
we compute input parameter.
See it on the figure.
So it's like a distance from
the base track to the point
of the original particle.
And we compute the angel that
is the angle between original particle and
each base track.
So those features are added to
a classifier like random forest or
XGboost or whatever.
And then we can get a solution that gives
baseline result around 0.96 for
area under the ROC curve, or precision that
is roughly 1.0 at recall equal to 0.5.
[MUSIC]